Andre Morales, a 36-year-old from Brooklyn, arrived before 3:00 a.m. Tuesday and planned to ask Hillary Rodham Clinton how it felt to work for President Obama after he had defeated her in the 2008 Democratic primary.

Donna Gabrielle, a 65-year-old retiree, said she wanted to get here at 2:00 p.m. on Monday to be first in line, but she couldn’t make it until 4:00 a.m. on Tuesday. Jacqueline Corsentin, 21, a college student, is writing her senior thesis on why Mrs. Clinton would make a good president. She arrived at the flagship Barnes & Noble in Union Square from New Jersey at 6:00 a.m.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

In Memoir, Hillary Clinton Emphasizes Her Softer SideJUNE 6, 2014
Books of The Times: Hillary Clinton’s Book ‘Hard Choices’ Portrays a Tested Policy WonkJUNE 7, 2014
In Memoir, Hillary Clinton Discusses Russia, Syria and IraqJUNE 5, 2014
Finally, after a carefully scripted rollout that included high-profile television interviews and planned leaks to the news media, Mrs. Clinton arrived just after 11:00 a.m. for her first book signing on a nationwide tour to promote her new memoir, “Hard Choices.” Wearing a hot-pink blazer and splashy silver necklace, she waved and thanked the crowd of more than 1,000 people, many of whom had slept outside the store overnight. They bought their $35 hardcover copies in advance at 30 percent off and snaked through the ropes set up on the fourth floor of the bookstore.

Photo

Some of the people lined up outside the bookstore for Mrs. Clinton's appearance on Tuesday had waited all night. Credit Andrew Renneisen/The New York Times
Mrs. Clinton told ABC News on Monday that she would not decide whether to run for president in 2016 before the end of the year. But her book signing brought with it the trappings and logistics of a campaign event.

Hundreds of journalists, cameramen and photographers, speaking several languages, waited outside from 7:00 a.m. for dozens of Secret Service agents to examine their gear. Cranky cameramen set up on a riser complained that photographers were blocking their shots, and print reporters typed up every detail, including attendees “shhhh"-ing each other as Mrs. Clinton made her way to the podium.

Organizers announced that reporters could remain in the room for 20 minutes of the two-hour book signing and were not allowed to ask Mrs. Clinton questions. A five-person assembly line of young aides handed Mrs. Clinton books to sign and guided customers on to the stage, where she sat at a wooden desk, flanked by Secret Service agents.

Of her book, a memoir about her four years as secretary of state, Mrs. Clinton said it was “really about the hard choices everybody has to make in life and, in particular, the hard choices” she made, or helped make in that role.

“We have a lot of hard choices ahead of us to make our country as great and strong as it should be,” Mrs. Clinton added. “Looking forward not only to being here but also having a chance to hear from you.”

It came as little surprise that Mrs. Clinton, a former senator from New York, chose this sprawling book store — one of the few remaining in Manhattan — as her first stop on a publicity blitz to promote “Hard Choices.” The store sits in the center of left-leaning New York and attracted a diversity of supporters from the tristate area. As of Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton’s book tour did not include stops in the crucial battleground states Iowa, New Hampshire or Ohio.

The crowd on Tuesday included the young (Katrina Yoder pulled her 11-year-old daughter out of school to meet Mrs. Clinton. “I’m not going to remember the last Tuesday toward the end of my school year, but I’ll remember this,” her daughter, Noa, said) and the old (“We’re both grandmas,” sad Loraine Czarnecki, 67, from Westchester). And many of those in line said they considered the packed book signing as a preamble to a 2016 campaign.

John Fashtak, a 64-year-old retiree from New Jersey, planned to ask Mrs. Clinton to sign his copy of “Hard Choices” simply as “Pres.”

(Guidelines handed out to attendees along with fluorescent wristbands prohibited Mrs. Clinton from personalizing books or signing memorabilia. “NO posted photography with the author,” the rules read.)

Mr. Fashtak was undeterred: “We’re here to tell her she has to run.” His wife, Diane, 71, added: “I don’t want her to shatter the glass ceiling this time. I want her to kick down the door.”

Photo

A bus supporting Mrs. Clinton's candidacy was parked outside the event. Credit Andrew Renneisen/The New York Times
Down the street, a “Hillary Bus” paid for by the outside group Ready for Hillary signed up volunteers and handed out stickers. Organizers prepared to drive the bus, which is fitted with leather sofas, a kitchenette and shower, 17 hours for the Chicago event, where she will appear with Mayor Rahm Emanuel, a former aide to President Bill Clinton who has endorsed her potential candidacy.

Many of the people who waited for Mrs. Clinton said they considered this a pre-2016 event. “This seems like what you would do right before a campaign,” said Josh Mann, 32. “You write a book and create buzz.”

Steve Lara, 35, a veteran who arrived from Long Island at 2:00 a.m., said he supported Mrs. Clinton in 2008 and could not get behind Mr. Obama in the general election. But, hearing Mrs. Clinton talk about her relationship with the president has swayed him. “I was always on the fence with Obama, but she brought me back,” he added.

Not everyone is enthusiastic about Mrs. Clinton’s book tour. Republicans have seized on her comments to ABC News about the attack on an American diplomatic compound in Benghazi, Libya, that left four Americans dead in 2012. Mrs. Clinton said she gave “very direct instructions” to security experts and was correct to defer to their judgment.

“I’m not equipped to sit and look at blueprints to determine where the blast walls need to be or where the reinforcements need to be,” Mrs. Clinton said.

When the interviewer, Diane Sawyer, repeatedly asked Mrs. Clinton whether she should have done anything differently, she replied: “I certainly would give anything on earth if this had not happened.”

Mrs. Clinton also faced criticism for saying that she and former President Clinton “struggled to piece together the resources for mortgages for houses” after leaving the White House.

Republicans said the comment was evidence that Mrs. Clinton’s paid speeches and income from multiple books had made her out of touch with struggling Americans. The hashtag #HillaryIsSoPoor was trending on Twitter on Monday night.

Mrs. Clinton told ABC News that a congressional investigation into the Benghazi attack was “more of a reason to run, because I do not believe our great country should be playing minor league ball.” Throughout “Hard Choices” and in recent remarks, Mrs. Clinton has made it clear that she believes Republicans have attacked her for political gain.

Although federal campaign laws prohibit Mrs. Clinton from coordinating with Ready for Hillary or any super PAC, she did call to thank Mr. Emanuel for his support, as she has many of the other prominent Democrats who have gotten behind the group, said three people familiar with Mrs. Clinton’s thank-you calls.

A Barnes & Noble spokeswoman said the crowd’s size was not particularly unusual. The actor James Franco, Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Suzanne Collins, the author of “The Hunger Games” trilogy, received similar welcomes. The Jonas Brothers got bigger crowds.